CPP-4962 S6169 Update rspec to cover if consteval and its effects on is_constant_evaluated (#3696)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6169/cfamily/rule.adoc

Reviewer: What follows in a grammar nit -- feel free to dismiss if you want to move forward, as the text is still understandable.

The use of `will + inf` in this document can often, if not always, be replaced with the present tense. What I mean by that is that facts (that don't change) should be presented/explained using the present tense.

Example:

> When used inside a context that is either always evaluated at compile-time or always evaluated at runtime, a call to std::is_constant_evaluated ~will always return~ _always returns_ the same result, similarly if (not) consteval ~will always evaluate~ _always evaluates_ the same branch, making their use redundant.

Author: Just edit them in place.

Reviewer: Suggestions added

This rule raises an issue when `std::is_constant_evaluated()` or `if consteval` are used in a context where they always produce the same result, i.e. are always `true` or always `false`.

== Why is this an issue?

> The `std::is_constant_evaluated` function (introduced in {cpp}20) and the `if consteval` language construct (introduced in {cpp}23) are used to determine whether the evaluation is performed at compile-time or runtime.

Reviewer 2: Should we add parentheses?
```suggestion
The `std::is_constant_evaluated()` function (introduced in {cpp}20) and the `if consteval` language construct (introduced in {cpp}23) are used to determine whether the evaluation is performed at compile-time or runtime.
```

Author: `std::is_constant_evaluated()` is `bool`, not a function.

> The `std::is_constant_evaluated` function (introduced in {cpp}20) and the `if consteval` language construct (introduced in {cpp}23) are used to determine whether the evaluation is performed at compile-time or runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `std::is_constant_evaluated` function (introduced in {cpp}20) and the `if consteval` language construct (introduced in {cpp}23) are used to determine whether the evaluation is performed at compile-time or at runtime.
```

This can be useful when, for example, two different implementations are provided for an algorithm: 

> one, that does not perform any IO operations and is compatible with compile-time evaluation, and the other one, at runtime that emits log entries as a side-effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
one that does not perform any IO operations and is compatible with compile-time evaluation, and the other one that also emits log entries at runtime.
```

> These constructs should be used inside functions that are `constexpr`, and thus can be evaluated both at compile-time and runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These constructs should be used inside functions that are `constexpr`, and thus can be evaluated both at compile-time and at runtime.
```

When used inside a context that is either always evaluated at compile-time or always evaluated at runtime,
a call to `std::is_constant_evaluated` will always return the same result, similarly `if (not) consteval` will always evaluate the same branch,
making their use redundant.

This rule will raise issues for contexts where expressions are always evaluated at compile-time or always evaluated at runtime.

In contexts that are always evaluated at compile-time:

* `+std::is_constant_evaluated()+` will always return `true`.
* `+if consteval { /* then-branch */ }+` will always be `true` and evaluate the `then-branch`.

> * `+if !consteval { /* then-branch */ } else { /* else-branch */}+` will always be `false` and evaluate the `else-branch`.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this part is adding lots of value.

Author: I think we should explain what this functions due, and how they actually work, so I see value in this explanation. We ask user to remove redundant `if consteval` and calls, and they need to know how to remove them.
This ties to rule implementation and messages, and explain what we mean by saying `if consteval` is true, which is not obvious.

These include:

* The conditions of an `if constexpr` or a `static_assert`.
+
[source,cpp]
----
constexpr double power(double b, int x) {
  if constexpr (std::is_constant_evaluated()) {  // Noncompliant: will always be true
    // compile-time implementation
  } else {
    // runtime implementation
  }
}

static_assert(std::is_constant_evaluated()); // Noncompliant: will always return true
----

* The initialization of a variable declared `constexpr` or `constinit`.
+
[source,cpp]
----
constexpr int size = std::is_constant_evaluated() ? 10 : 20; // Noncompliant: will always return true
constinit int val = std::is_constant_evaluated() ? 20 : 30; // Noncompliant: will always return true
---- 

> * All expressions inside the immediate context. This includes bodies of `consteval` function, `then` branches of `if consteval`, and `else` branches of `if not consteval`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* All expressions inside an _immediate context_. This includes bodies of `consteval` function, `then` branches of `if consteval`, and `else` branches of `if not consteval`.
```
Or even:
```suggestion
* All expressions inside what is called an _immediate context_: This includes bodies of `consteval` function, `then` branches of `if consteval`, and `else` branches of `if not consteval`.
```

> * All expressions inside the immediate context. This includes bodies of `consteval` function, `then` branches of `if consteval`, and `else` branches of `if not consteval`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* All expressions inside the immediate context. For instance, bodies of `consteval` function, `then` branches of `if consteval`, and `else` branches of `if not consteval`.
```

+
[source,cpp]
----
consteval bool onlyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* Branch is always taken */
  } else {
    /* Branch is never taken */
  }
  
  if not consteval { // Noncompliant: always false
    /* Branch is never taken */
  } else {
    /* Branch is always taken */
  }

>   bool ce = std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true

Reviewer 2: Maybe redundant with the next line?

Author: I disagreee. Adding `const` here will trigger attempt constant evaluation, regardless if the funciton is `consteval`, `constexpr` or runtime. I think it is worth to show not only return.

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true
}

constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {

>   if consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call side

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  if consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site
```

    if consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be true
      /* .... */ 
    }
    if not consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be false
      /* .... */
    }
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true
  }

>   if ! consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call side

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  if ! consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site
```

    /* Runtime branch */
  } else {
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true
  }

>   return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: depends on call side

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: depends on call site
```

> constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {

Reviewer: This `possiblyCompileTimeFunc` example and the next one are almost identical. When reading the description, it confused me -- I was looking for the nuances to make sure I was understanding the rule correctly. I expect users to be equally confused. Maybe one of them should be removed?

Author: They focus only on parts that were already explain. First `possiblyCompileTimeFunc` only illustrates always true cases. And this shows only always false cases. I do not think removing them helps.
Please provide concrete suggestionsfor change, that will still preserve the flow of rspec.

Reviewer: On 2nd read, I think I understand better what you wanted to achieve.

I think you did a great job with the sub-sections below -- the titles helped me understand the flow. I wonder if it would also help to transform these two sentences into titles:
 * In contexts that are always evaluated at compile-time:
 * In contexts that are always evaluated at runtime:
Or add a title before if transforming is not great, like `# Compile-time/Runtime contexts`. It would help visually mark the examples as _definitely_ different.

WDYT? I don't want to press too much on this -- it's just an idea and it's very subjective.

Author: I try to use the additional titles to cover something extra, more detailed information, that are not important for understanding the issue. For me this generic explanation of always compile/run time is essential and part of main body of the issue, thus I would prefer not exclude it.

I think the main body could be researched to avoid such duplication, but I do not think it is worth it now. We already are spending a week on this rule. If you can thing of slight renames or commentary on the examples that would help to highlight the difference, I would be ok with having them.

Reviewer: Okay, let's not overengeneer this then. 👍

}
----

In contexts that are always evaluated at runtime:

* `+std::is_constant_evaluated()+` will always return `false`.
* `+if consteval { /* then-branch */ } else { /* else-branch */}+` will always be `false` and evaluate `else-branch`.
* `+if !consteval { /* then-branch */ }+` will always be `true` and evaluate `then-branch`.

> 

Reviewer 2: Same remark

Author: And the same answer.

They include:

> * The body of functions that are not `constexpr` or `consteval`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The body of functions that are neither `constexpr` nor `consteval`.
```

> * The body of functions that are not `constexpr` or `consteval`.

Reviewer 2: What about:
```cpp
int main() {
    static constinit int i = std::is_constant_evaluated() ? 42 : 0;
    return i;
}
```

(I think this is corner-casy enough that it can just be ignored)

Author: This is covered by first section and initialier of `cosntexpr` variable. You could create same case for `if consteval`

Reviewer 2: It is not clear that the first section has priority over the second section. Right now, we say that, unconditionally, bodies of functions not declared constexpr/consteval are always evaluated at runtime, while it's only partially true.
But being more accurate would mean being much more verbose...

Author: Also rspec, goes in tandem with rule imp, that will raise the issue in that case, and point to the constexpr variable initialization in secondary. So, I do not think this will be that much confusion for the users.

Author: Added example with separate paragrahp

* `else` branches of `if consteval`.

* `then` branches of `if not consteval`.

[source,cpp]
----
bool onlyRuntimeFunc() {
  if consteval { // Noncompliant: always false
    /* Never taken branch */
  } else {
    /* Always taken branch */
  }

  if not consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* Always taken branch */
  } else {
    /* Never taken branch */
  }

>   bool ce = std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false

Reviewer 2: Maybe redundant with next line

Author: See: https://godbolt.org/z/K5f93Ex4Y

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false
}

constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {

>   if not consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call side

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  if not consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site
```

    if consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be false
      /* ... */ 
    }

>     if not consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be true

Reviewer 2: I globally like those examples, but they are a little bit verbose. Maybe having just `if consteval` of `if not consteval` (not both) would be enough?

Author: I think here being verbose, and redundant helps to convey message. I do not have else branches, and could have.

      /* .... */
    }
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false
  }

>   if consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call side

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  if consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site
```

    /* Compile-time branch */
  } else {
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false
  }

>   return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: depends on call side

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: depends on call site
```

}
----

=== When are issues raised for lambdas?

The call operator of a lambda can be explicitly marked `consteval`. In such cases, it can only be invoked at compile-time, and the rule raises an issue:

[source,cpp]
----
[] () consteval {
  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* .... */
  }
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true
};
----

Otherwise, the lambda call operator is implicitly considered to be `constexpr`,
regardless if it is marked so.
This means that the lambda can be invoked at compile-time, 
and uses of `std::is_constant_evaluated()` and `if consteval` are not redundant.

> However, when a lambda is invoked locally only in compile-time or runtime context,
> checking the evaluation context is still redundant.
> In particular, this is clear, when the lambda is immediately invoked. The rule will raise issues in that case:

Reviewer 2: I might miss a case, but could it be simplified into:
```suggestion
However, when a lambda is immediately invoked in compile-time or runtime context, it becomes implicitly consteval, and checking the evaluation context is redundant.
```

Author: This is not true. Lambda does not become `consteval` because it is called at compile time, and for sure is not `consteval` if it's only at runtime,

Reviewer 2: Yes, my suggestion is not good... My point is that I found it difficult to read your sentence...  What about:
```
However, when a lambda is immediately invoked, its evaluation context is known and does not need to be tested.
```

Author: I wanted to make this sentence cover case, if we extend imply to cover for example passing the lambda to `std::any_of`, so say this as special example.

[source,cpp]
----
// The lambda is provably invoked at compile-time only:
constexpr bool ce = [] () {
  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    return true;
  }
  return false;
}();
----

=== When do `constexpr` functions become immediate (`consteval`)?

> An immediate (`consteval`) function can be invoked only at compile-time,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An immediate (`consteval`) function can only be invoked at compile-time,
```

and thus requires that all arguments are known at compile-time,

> i.e. either there are constants or the function is invoked in the immediate context:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
i.e. either they are constants or the function is invoked in an _immediate context_:
```

[source,cpp]
----
consteval int process(int);

> float process(float);

Reviewer 2: Why this overload?

Author: It is required for explanation.

Author: Removed.

constexpr void foo(int x) {
  return process(x); // ill-formed, the process cannot be called at compile-time
}
----

In the case of non-template functions, this can be fixed by putting the call
to immediate function inside an `if consteval` block.
However, in the case of templates, it is possible that depending on the template parameters,
an immediate or runtime function will be called.
In such case, the compiler will automatically change the enclosing function to an immediate function,

> in a process referred to as immediate escalation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in a process referred to as _immediate escalation_:
```

[source,cpp]
----
consteval int process(int);
float process(float);

template<typename T>
constexpr T foo(T x) {
  // Calls `consteval` process if T = int, and runtimne for T = float.
  // foo<int> is promoted to immediate function.
  return process(x);
}
----

The same behavior is applied to lambdas, both generic and non-generic,
if they contain an immediate invocation.

> As a consequence, uses of `std::is_constant_evaluated()` and `if consteval` may be redundant,
> in case of immediate escalated lambda or function template instantiations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a consequence, uses of `std::is_constant_evaluated()` and `if consteval` are also redundant when used in an _immediate escalated_ lambda or function template instantiations.
```

> This rule will raise issues if such uses are redundant for all possible specializations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This rule will raise issues if such uses are redundant for all possible specializations
```

of lambda or template:

[source,cpp]
----
consteval int process(int);
float process(float);

template<typename T>
constexpr bool conditionallyImmediate(T x) {
  process(x); // Calls consteval function depending on the argument type
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: not all specializations are immediate
}

template<typename T>
constexpr bool alwaysImmediate(T x, int t) {
  process(t); // Always call consteval function
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: all specializations are immediate
}

constexpr auto nonGenericLambda = [](int x) {
  process(x); // Always call consteval function
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: lambda is immediate
};

template<typename T>

> constexpr auto = conditionalGenericLambda = [] (auto x) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
constexpr auto = conditionallyImmediateGenericLambda = [] (auto x) {
```

  process(x); // Calls consteval function depending on the argument type
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: not all specializations are immediate
};

template<typename T>

> constexpr auto alwaysGenericLambda = [](T x, int t) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
constexpr auto alwaysImmediateGenericLambda = [](T x, int t) {
```

  process(t); // Always call consteval function
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: all specializations are immediate
};
----

== How to fix it

Depending on the context, the issue may be fixed by:

> * changing the context of invocation: removing `constexpr` from `if` or changing function from `consteval` to `constexpr`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* changing the context of invocation: replacing an `if constexpr` with a simple `if` or changing a function from `consteval` to `constexpr`.
```

* removing dead code: replacing `std::is_constant_evaluated()` with the produced value, removing `if consteval` and dead branches.

> === Code examples
> 
> Changing `if constexpr` into `if`, so the condition is no longer always evaluated at compile-time.

Reviewer 2: I think this would be a more descriptive title.
```suggestion
=== Changing `if constexpr` into `if`, so the condition is no longer always evaluated at compile-time.
```

Author: I do not think this is allowed by rspec format.

Author: Update the examples to give them some subsections.

    /* Compile-time branch */
  } else {
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false
  }

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: depends on call site
}
----

=== Why issue is raised for non-compile time variables?

For some variables, the compile will try to initialize them at compile time,
and only if such initialization is not possible, will evaluted them at runtime.

This happesns in two scenarios:

* For variable with static and thread storage duration, like gobal, static, and thread local variables.
+
[source,cpp]
----
int x = 10;           // Evaluted at compile time
int const y = init(); // Evaluted at compile time, if `init()` is constant-expression
std::mutex m;         // Evaluted at compile time, because default constructor is constexpr

void runtime() {
  static int s = 20; // Evaluted at compile time.
}
----
+
Evaluating such variables at compile time, avoids order of initialization issues.
It is recommended to mark such variables as `constexpr` (if they can be made `const`) or `constinit`.

* For local variables that are declared `const` and have integral and enumeration type.+

> +

Reviewer: The `+` is currently displayed. Did you intend to remove the empty line?

Author: Fixed

}
----

=== When are issues raised for lambdas?

The call operator of a lambda can be explicitly marked `consteval`. In such cases, it can only be invoked at compile-time, and the rule raises an issue:

[source,cpp]
----
[] () consteval {
  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* .... */
  }
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true
};
----

Otherwise, the lambda call operator is implicitly considered to be `constexpr`,
regardless if it is marked so.
This means that the lambda can be invoked at compile-time, 
and uses of `std::is_constant_evaluated()` and `if consteval` are not redundant.

However, when a lambda is invoked locally only in compile-time or runtime context,
checking the evaluation context is still redundant.
In particular, this is clear, when the lambda is immediately invoked. The rule will raise issues in that case:

[source,cpp]
----
// The lambda is provably invoked at compile-time only:
constexpr bool ce = [] () {
  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    return true;
  }
  return false;
}();
----

=== When do `constexpr` functions become immediate (`consteval`)?

> An immediate (`consteval`) function can only be invoked at compile-time,

Reviewer: Why the parenthesis around `consteval`? Do you mean `immediate function === consteval function`? Something else? Maybe introduce what "immediate" means in the first sentence of this section.

Author: This whole section explains whta immediate is. Please suggest concrete rewrite.

Reviewer: My confusion arises from the use of parenthesis. The new wording makes it easier to understand. One nit grammar though:

```
An immediate (including one marked `consteval`) function can only be invoked at compile-time,
and thus requires that all arguments are known at compile-time,
i.e. either they are constants or the function is invoked in an _immediate context_:
```

the `(including one marked consteval)` part should be after `function`, not before (`one` is currently a "forward" reference and it's confusing, if not incorrect).

Author: Done.

and thus requires that all arguments are known at compile-time,
i.e. either they are constants or the function is invoked in an _immediate context_:
[source,cpp]
----
consteval int process(int);
float process(float);

> constexpr void foo(int x) {
>   return process(x); // ill-formed, the process cannot be called at compile-time
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
constexpr auto foo(int x) {
  return process(x); // ill-formed, the process cannot be called at compile-time
}
```

Additionally, I would explain why it cannot be called at compile-time. Here, because of the overload, the reader could assume it's because of `process`. But it's because of `x`.

Or maybe you meant to use float?

Or maybe I did not understand something else. 🙃

Author: It was explained paragraph before, I do not see a point of repeating it.

Author: Removed one overload and change the name of the funciton so it will not be confused with one having multiple overloads.

  // foo<int> is promoted to immediate function.
  return process(x);
}
----

The same behavior is applied to lambdas, both generic and non-generic,
if they contain an immediate invocation.

As a consequence, uses of `std::is_constant_evaluated()` and `if consteval` are also redundant when used in an _immediate escalated_ lambda or function template instantiations.

This rule will raise issues if such uses are redundant for all possible specializations
of lambda or template:

[source,cpp]
----
consteval int process(int);
float process(float);

template<typename T>
constexpr bool conditionallyImmediate(T x) {
  process(x); // Calls consteval function depending on the argument type
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: not all specializations are immediate
}

template<typename T>
constexpr bool alwaysImmediate(T x, int t) {
  process(t); // Always call consteval function
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: all specializations are immediate
}

constexpr auto nonGenericLambda = [](int x) {
  process(x); // Always call consteval function
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: lambda is immediate
};

template<typename T>

> constexpr auto = conditionallyImmediateGenericLambda = [] (auto x) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
constexpr auto conditionallyImmediateGenericLambda = [] (auto x) {
```

These include:

* The conditions of an `if constexpr` or a `static_assert`.
+
[source,cpp]
----
constexpr double power(double b, int x) {
  if constexpr (std::is_constant_evaluated()) {  // Noncompliant: will always be true
    // compile-time implementation
  } else {
    // runtime implementation
  }
}

static_assert(std::is_constant_evaluated()); // Noncompliant: will always return true
----

* The initialization of a variable declared `constexpr` or `constinit`.
+
[source,cpp]
----
constexpr int size = std::is_constant_evaluated() ? 10 : 20; // Noncompliant: will always return true
constinit int val = std::is_constant_evaluated() ? 20 : 30; // Noncompliant: will always return true
---- 

* All expressions inside an _immediate context_. For instance bodies of `consteval` function, `then` branches of `if consteval`, and `else` branches of `if not consteval`.
+
[source,cpp]
----
consteval bool onlyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* Branch is always taken */
  } else {
    /* Branch is never taken */
  }
  
  if not consteval { // Noncompliant: always false
    /* Branch is never taken */
  } else {
    /* Branch is always taken */
  }

>   bool ce = std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true
>   return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  bool ce = std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always true
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always returns true
```

}

constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site

>     if consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if consteval { // Noncompliant: always true
```

      /* .... */ 
    }

>     if not consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if not consteval { // Noncompliant: always false
```

      /* .... */
    }

>     return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always returns true
```

  }

  if ! consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site
    /* Runtime branch */
  } else {

>     return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always returns true
```

  }

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: depends on call site
}
----

In contexts that are always evaluated at runtime:

> * `+std::is_constant_evaluated()+` will always return `false`.
> * `+if consteval { /* then-branch */ } else { /* else-branch */}+` will always be `false` and evaluate `else-branch`.
> * `+if !consteval { /* then-branch */ }+` will always be `true` and evaluate `then-branch`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `+std::is_constant_evaluated()+` always returns `false`.
* `+if consteval { /* then-branch */ } else { /* else-branch */}+` always evaluates `else-branch`.
* `+if !consteval { /* then-branch */ }+` always evaluates `then-branch`.
```

They include:

* The body of functions that are neither `constexpr` nor `consteval`.

* `else` branches of `if consteval`.

* `then` branches of `if not consteval`.

[source,cpp]
----
bool onlyRuntimeFunc() {
  if consteval { // Noncompliant: always false
    /* Never taken branch */
  } else {
    /* Always taken branch */
  }

  if not consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* Always taken branch */
  } else {
    /* Never taken branch */
  }

>   bool ce = std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false
>   return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  bool ce = std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always false
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always returns false
```

}

constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if not consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site

>     if consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if consteval { // Noncompliant: always false
```

      /* ... */ 
    }

>     if not consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if not consteval { // Noncompliant: always true
```

      /* .... */
    }

>     return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always returns false
```

  }

  if consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site
    /* Compile-time branch */
  } else {

>     return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always returns false
```

  }

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: depends on call site
}
----

=== When is the issue raised for variables that are neither `constexpr` nor `constinit`?

> For some variables, the compiler will try to initialize them at compile time,
> and only if such initialization is not possible, will evaluate them at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some variables, the compiler tries to initialize them at compile time.
They are initialized at runtime only if such initialization is not possible.
```

This happens in two scenarios:

* For variables with static and thread storage duration, like global, static, and thread-local variables.
+
[source,cpp]
----
int x = 10;           // Evaluated at compile time

> int const y = init(); // Evaluated at compile time, if `init()` is constant-expression
> std::mutex m;         // Evaluated at compile time, the selected constructor is constexpr

Reviewer: ```suggestion
int const y = init(); // Evaluated at compile time if `init()` is constant-expression
std::mutex m;         // Evaluated at compile time because the selected constructor is constexpr
```

void runtime() {
  static int s = 20; // Evaluted at compile time.
}
----
+
Evaluating such variables at compile time avoids order of initialization issues.
It is recommended to mark such variables as `constexpr` (if they can be made `const`) or `constinit`.

* For local variables that are declared `const` and have integral and enumeration types.
+
[source,cpp]
----
void cpp03Code() {
  int const size = 5; // Evaluated at compile time
  int arr[size] = {}; // OK, size is constant
  for (int i = 0; i < size; ++i) {
    /* .... */
  }
}
----
+

> Evaluating such variables at compile time was introduced in the first {cpp} standard before `constexpr` was introduced, to allow patterns like the above.

Reviewer: A small orthogonal suggestion to make the flow easier.
```suggestion
Evaluating such variables at compile time was already possible before `constexpr` was introduced to allow patterns like the above.
```

It is recommended to mark such variables as `constexpr` since {cpp}11.

> Due to the above special rules, the `std::is_constant_evaluated()` and `if consteval` will always be `true` within such implicit constant initialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the above special rules, `std::is_constant_evaluated()` and `if consteval` are always `true` within such implicit constant initialization.
```

This may lead to surprising and intuitive results, thus this rule raises issues in such cases:

[source,cpp]
----
void onlyRuntime() {
  bool const ce = std::is_constant_evaluted(); // Noncomplaint: always true, due implicit constant evaluation
  bool e = std::is_constant_evaluted();        // Noncomplaint: always false not implicit constant evaluation
}

constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {
  bool const ce = std::is_constant_evaluted(); // Noncomplaint: always true, due implicit constant evaluation
  bool e = std::is_constant_evaluted();        // Complaint: depends on the call site
}
----

=== When are issues raised for lambdas?

The call operator of a lambda can be explicitly marked `consteval`. In such cases, it can only be invoked at compile-time, and the rule raises an issue:

[source,cpp]
----
[] () consteval {
  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* .... */
  }

>   return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always returns true
```

};
----

Otherwise, the lambda call operator is implicitly considered to be `constexpr`,
regardless if it is marked so.
This means that the lambda can be invoked at compile-time, 
and uses of `std::is_constant_evaluated()` and `if consteval` are not redundant.

However, when a lambda is invoked locally only in compile-time or runtime context,
checking the evaluation context is still redundant.

> In particular, this is clear, when the lambda is immediately invoked. The rule will raise issues in that case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, this is obvious when the lambda is immediately invoked. The rule raises issues in that case:
```

[source,cpp]
----

> // The lambda is provably invoked at compile-time only:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The lambda is provably invoked only at compile-time:
```

constexpr bool ce = [] () {
  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    return true;
  }
  return false;
}();
----

> === When do `constexpr` functions become immediate (`consteval`)?

Author: Using `consteval` is misleading. 
```suggestion
=== When do `constexpr` functions become immediate (compile-time only)?
```

An immediate function (including one marked `consteval`) can only be invoked at compile-time,
and thus requires that all arguments are known at compile-time,
i.e. either they are constants or the function is invoked in an _immediate context_:
[source,cpp]
----
consteval void handle(int);

constexpr void foo(int x) {
  handle(x); // ill-formed, the process cannot be called at compile-time,
             // because `x` may have runtime value
}
----

In the case of non-template functions, this can be fixed by putting the call
to immediate function inside an `if consteval` block.
[source,cpp]
----
constexpr void foo(int x) {
  if consteval {
    handle(x); // OK, the handle is evaluated only at compile-time
  }
}
----

However, in the case of templates, it is possible that depending on the template parameters,
an immediate or runtime function will be called.

> In such case, the compiler will automatically change the enclosing function to an immediate function,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such case, the compiler automatically changes the enclosing function to an immediate function,
```

in a process referred to as _immediate escalation_:

[source,cpp]
----
consteval int process(int);
float process(float);

template<typename T>
constexpr T foo(T x) {
  // Calls `consteval` process if T = int, and runtimne for T = float.
  // foo<int> is promoted to immediate function.
  return process(x);
}
----

The same behavior is applied to lambdas, both generic and non-generic,
if they contain an immediate invocation.

As a consequence, uses of `std::is_constant_evaluated()` and `if consteval` are also redundant when used in an _immediate escalated_ lambda or function template instantiations.

> This rule will raise issues if such uses are redundant for all possible specializations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule raises issues if such uses are redundant for all possible specializations
```

of lambda or template:

[source,cpp]
----
consteval int process(int);
float process(float);

template<typename T>
constexpr bool conditionallyImmediate(T x) {
  process(x); // Calls consteval function depending on the argument type
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: not all specializations are immediate
}

template<typename T>
constexpr bool alwaysImmediate(T x, int t) {

>   process(t); // Always call consteval function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  process(t); // Always calls consteval function
```

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: all specializations are immediate
}

constexpr auto nonGenericLambda = [](int x) {

>   process(x); // Always call consteval function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  process(x); // Always calls consteval function
```

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: lambda is immediate
};

template<typename T>
constexpr auto conditionallyImmediateGenericLambda = [] (auto x) {
  process(x); // Calls consteval function depending on the argument type
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: not all specializations are immediate
};

template<typename T>
constexpr auto alwaysImmediateGenericLambda = [](T x, int t) {

>   process(t); // Always call consteval function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  process(t); // Always calls consteval function
```

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: all specializations are immediate
};
----

== How to fix it

Depending on the context, the issue may be fixed by:

* changing the context of invocation: replacing an `if constexpr` with a simple `if` or changing a function from `consteval` to `constexpr`.
* removing dead code: replacing `std::is_constant_evaluated()` with the produced value, removing `if consteval` and dead branches.

=== Code examples

Changing `if constexpr` into `if`, so the condition is no longer always evaluated at compile-time.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
constexpr double power(double b, int x) {

>   if constexpr (std::is_constant_evaluated()) {  // Noncompliant: will always be true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if constexpr (std::is_constant_evaluated()) {  // Noncompliant: always true
```

* `else` branches of `if consteval`.

* `then` branches of `if not consteval`.

[source,cpp]
----
bool onlyRuntimeFunc() {
  if consteval { // Noncompliant: always false
    /* Never taken branch */
  } else {
    /* Always taken branch */
  }

  if not consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* Always taken branch */
  } else {
    /* Never taken branch */
  }

  bool ce = std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false
}

constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if not consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site
    if consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be false
      /* ... */ 
    }
    if not consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be true
      /* .... */
    }
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false
  }

  if consteval { // Compliant: depends on the call site
    /* Compile-time branch */
  } else {
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns false
  }

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: depends on call site
}
----

> === When the issue is raised for variables that are neither `constexpr` nor `constinit`?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== When is the issue raised for variables that are neither `constexpr` nor `constinit`?
```

  process(t); // Always calls consteval function
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: all specializations are immediate
}

constexpr auto nonGenericLambda = [](int x) {
  process(x); // Always calls consteval function
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: lambda is immediate
};

template<typename T>
constexpr auto conditionallyImmediateGenericLambda = [] (auto x) {
  process(x); // Calls consteval function depending on the argument type
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: not all specializations are immediate
};

template<typename T>
constexpr auto alwaysImmediateGenericLambda = [](T x, int t) {
  process(t); // Always calls consteval function
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: all specializations are immediate
};
----

== How to fix it

Depending on the context, the issue may be fixed by:

* changing the context of invocation: replacing an `if constexpr` with a simple `if` or changing a function from `consteval` to `constexpr`.
* removing dead code: replacing `std::is_constant_evaluated()` with the produced value, removing `if consteval` and dead branches.

=== Inside `if constexpr` condition

> Changing `if constexpr` into `if` leads to the condition is no longer always evaluated at compile-time,
> and now result of `std::is_constant_evaluated()` depends onn the call site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changing `if constexpr` into `if` leads to the condition is no longer always evaluated at compile-time,
and now the result of `std::is_constant_evaluated()` depends on the call site.
```

}
----

=== When the issue is raised for variables that are neither `constexpr` nor `constinit`?

> For some variables, the compile will try to initialize them at compile time,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some variables, the compiler will try to initialize them at compile time,
```

=== When do `constexpr` functions become immediate (`consteval`)?

An immediate (including one marked `consteval`) function can only be invoked at compile-time,
and thus requires that all arguments are known at compile-time,
i.e. either they are constants or the function is invoked in an _immediate context_:
[source,cpp]
----
consteval int handle(int);

constexpr void foo(int x) {
  return handle(x); // ill-formed, the process cannot be called at compile-time,
                    // because `x` may have runtime value
}
----

In the case of non-template functions, this can be fixed by putting the call
to immediate function inside an `if consteval` block.
[source,cpp]
----
consteval int handle(int);

constexpr void foo(int x) {
  if consteval {
    return handle(x); // OK, the handle is evaluated only at compile-time
  }

> }

Reviewer: I would remove the `return` (since it's a void function and control flow is orthogonal to the question)

Author: Done

}
----

> ==== Compliant solution

Reviewer 2: I'd like to see an additional compliant solution, tagged C++23, based on `if consteval` (this might require removing the diff)

Author: Added

}
----

> Removing dead branches and inlining the result of `std::is_constant_evaluated()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Removing dead branches and inlining the result of `std::is_constant_evaluated()`.
```

Author: I do not think this is allowed by rspec format.

Author: Update the examples to give them some subsections.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if consteval {
    if consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be true
      /* Code A */ 
    }
    if not consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be false
      /* Code B */
    }
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true
  }

  if ! consteval {
    /* Code C */
  }

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: result depends on evaluation
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if consteval {
    /* Code A */ 
    return true;
  }

  if ! consteval {
    /* Code C */
  }
 
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: result depends on evaluation
}
----

> Changing the function to be declared as `constexpr` to allow runtime evaluation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Changing the function to be declared as `constexpr` to allow runtime evaluation:
```

Author: I do not think this is allowed by rspec format.

Author: Update the examples to give them some subsections.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]
----

> consteval bool onlyCompileTimeFunc() {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consteval bool compileTimeOnlyFunc() {
```

  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* Code A */
  } else {
    /* Code B */
  }

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
----

> constexpr bool onlyCompileTimeFunc() {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
constexpr bool compileTimeOrRuntimeFunc() {
```

  if consteval { // Compliant: result depends on evaluation
    /* Code A */
  } else {
    /* Code B */
  }
  
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: result depends on evaluation
}
----

== Resources

=== Documentation
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/consteval[consteval specifier]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/if#Consteval_if[Consteval if]

=== Standards

> * Open Standards - https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2022/p2564r3.html[P2564R3] `consteval` needs to propagate up

Reviewer 2: In the past, we would have avoided referencing ISO C++ papers, because they were considered too arcane for our users. Did this policy change?

Author: I wouldn't consider this paper to be too arcane, and instead rather good description of the problem.

}
----

Alternatively, since {cpp}23 you can use `if consteval`.

[source,cpp]
----
constexpr double power(double b, int x) {
  if consteval { 
    // compile-time implementation
  } else {
    // runtime implementation
  }
}
----

Removing dead branches and inlining the result of `std::is_constant_evaluated()`.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if consteval {
    if consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be true
      /* Code A */ 
    }
    if not consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be false
      /* Code B */
    }
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true
  }

>   if ! consteval {

Reviewer: I think we should use only one style in the example.
I would use `not` since it is more natural (for me) because it is between two words (no symbols) and thus "easier" on the brain.

```suggestion
  if not consteval {
```

Author: I disagree, I want examples to cover options, so it is clear that these two options

Reviewer: In lit tests, I would definitely agree. Here, a bit less. But it's subjective so I'm fine keeping as-is.

}
----

Alternatively, since {cpp}23 you can use `if consteval`.

[source,cpp]
----
constexpr double power(double b, int x) {
  if consteval { 
    // compile-time implementation
  } else {
    // runtime implementation
  }
}
----

Removing dead branches and inlining the result of `std::is_constant_evaluated()`.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if consteval {

>     if consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if consteval { // Noncompliant: always true
```

      /* Code A */ 
    }

>     if not consteval { // Noncompliant: will always be false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if not consteval { // Noncompliant: always false
```

      /* Code B */
    }

>     return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always returns true
```

  }

  if ! consteval {
    /* Code C */
  }

  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: result depends on evaluation
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
constexpr bool possiblyCompileTimeFunc() {
  if consteval {
    /* Code A */ 
    return true;
  }

  if ! consteval {
    /* Code C */
  }
 
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Compliant: result depends on evaluation
}
----

Changing the function to be declared as `constexpr` to allow runtime evaluation:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
consteval bool compileTimeOnlyFunc() {
  if consteval {  // Noncompliant: always true
    /* Code A */
  } else {
    /* Code B */
  }

>   return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: will always returns true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return std::is_constant_evaluated(); // Noncompliant: always returns true
```
